---
layout: post
title:  "MDMS-1"
date:   2024-02-26 11:30:00
categories: mdms
tags: featured
image: /assets/article_images/2014-08-29-welcome-to-jekyll/desktop.JPG
---
#Designing a Master Data Management System (MDMS) for the real world -Part 1

I feel very strongly about this topic. However, it was not always like that. How is it any different from building any other complex system? I personally never thought much about master data mgmt systems. Until I came across this [online book](https://medium.com/r/?url=https://abseil.io/resources/swe-book/html/toc.html) (thanks Aameer!). In chapter 4 of this book, the author talks about the lifetime of data and how this one factor can have unforeseen consequences on the maintainability and usefulness of a system. It completely changed my perspective on how to view and judge the design of a system. There is one system in particular that piqued my interest. It sits at the core of any e-commerce stack, the catalog management system, or CMS.


In this article, I will use CMS as a special use-case and try to derive generic design aspects that are important while designing any MDMS.
## Designing an MDMS
### Important Functional Considerations
1. The contract and relationship between the entities have to be correct at all times. Really!! 😊
2. The life of an entity can vary from months to years.
3. The value of the attributes may be incorrect. The incorrect values can be discovered at any point during the lifetime of an entity. There should be support for correcting the values and managing its side effects. The cost of correction is an important consideration.
4. When an entity gets created it may have side effects on other entities or systems downstream. These downstream systems and entities can react to events in a sync or async manner.
5. Over time an entity may evolve, like splitting into two new entities, getting merged with another entity, or the definition of the entity changing to accommodate the changing business environment. This can lead to side effects. Based on the change, it is important to ensure that affected downstream entities or systems respond to change either synchronously or asynchronously.
6. **The system(s) have to reach a consistent state as a whole.**
7. Based on the business, any change or creation of an entity may or may not be visible immediately. This is normally (not necessarily) going to happen when the side effects take place asynchronously. _(A good question to ask is, whether it's the responsibility of the central MDMS to ensure all downstream systems reach a consistent state w.r.t the change or is it the other way around? We will cover this later.)_
8. The contracts with the dependent systems should allow self-checking to ensure the system has reached a consistent state. There should be a strategy to recover from an inconsistency. Solutions, can range from bubbling up the scenario so that it can be taken up offline to rolling back the changes.
9. It is important to capture the who, the what, the when, and with who's authorisation, an entity was created, edited, or archived.
10. It is important to build the explainability of every mutation. It is also important from an audit perspective.
11. Deleting an entity is non-trivial. It depends on the system and prevailing laws etc. It can lead to potential Controls risks downstream.

To understand these design considerations, we will take the CMS as a reference point.
> _Let me take a short sidebar and give a very high-level introduction of CMS - _
> #### _What is a CMS? _
> _For any e-commerce company, its catalog is one of the fundamental building blocks. Almost all the other services, in some way, depend on the catalog to carry out their business. _
> _A catalog is comprised of the following entities. Each of these entities are only high-level concepts. Their actual implementation can change from business to business._
> _A definition of a product. A product represents an entity that can have a physical manifestation, like toothpaste, or a service, like insurance.
> _The definition of a product usually confirms with a predefined template. It is also sometimes called vertical. _
> _A vertical defines the template of a given class of similar products. It essentially consists of attributes that define a given product. The value of these attributes can be open text, enumerated, list-type, > image-type, etc. These attributes can belong to different sub-templates like tax-specific attributes, batch-specific attributes, or physical-details-specific attributes. _
> _All the products can be grouped into something called a category tree. However, this category tree is specific to the consumer. For example, the customer-facing category tree will group products in a fashion that allows customers to navigate the tree easily and find the right product ASAP. Whereas, the business teams would like to view the category tree based on how the business teams have structured themselves internally._
> _Along with the category tree, there can be many other ways through which one would like to group these products. For example in clothing, there can be multiple variants. One variant can be based on size, while the other can be based on colour. The customer needs to view all of them together to ease discovery. The idea of variant needs to be very fluid as the needs can be different for different classes of products. _
> All in all, it is a fairly complex interaction of various entities. The reality is more twisted and complex, but for the discussion, the above set of definitions will suffice._
### Entity creation
One of the important design considerations is how an entity or group of entities gets created vs when they become available for business. There is a difference between the two. Consider the following example. A new biscuit is introduced in the market. For an e-commerce site to be able to purchase and sell this new biscuit it needs to do the following - 
It needs pictures of the product
It needs attribute-value of various identification attributes like weight, brand-name etc. These values are important for better customers-experience and for warehouse operations to search/identify this product
It needs taxation or MOQ (minimum order quantity) details for procurement and accounting to order and bill the product
It will also need pricing details, wholesale promotion details (1 biscuit free in a brand box of 20), or website promotions.

Not all details are needed at once. Initially, the details related to procurement are required. Once the material is received at the warehouse, packaging and other details are required. The pictures of the product may or may not be available. If not, it needs to be clicked in the photo studio after receiving the product at the warehouse. Once the product is stocked, it will become visible on the website after the pricing and other promotion details are available. As already mentioned these details may not be available immediately, and will get filled asynchronously as and when they are available. 
A simple product creation can have side effects across other services like Accounting, Warehousing, Procurement, Planning, Pricing, and Promotions, to name a few. 
 Attribute value correction
There will always be a certain percentage of entities that will have incorrect values for one or more of its attributes. Which class of attribute it is, determines how the side effects will look like. Continuing with the biscuit example above, at some point in the future during the audit its discovered that the tax rate was incorrectly entered. Now, to fix the issue we will immediately update the attribute value. But, what about all the procurements and accounting entries that already happened with the incorrect tax details? Who fixes that? 
There may be side-effects that the owner of catalog system may not even be aware of. 
Another side effect of updating the attribute value is one may end up creating duplicates. Once a duplicate is discovered one needs to again figure out the potential side effects of merging the duplicate entities. 
Another important aspect one has to ensure is that for any statistical analysis (like financial reporting) involving the merged entities over a time-window, should handle the pre and post merging event. 
Entity evolution
Why will an entity evolve? There can be many reasons. As the business evolves the role of an entity also evolves. An evolution can manifest in multiple ways - 
New entities get created and new relationships are formed. 
New attributes can be added to the definition. For example, in India, the Government of India passed a mandate that every edible product being sold on an e-commerce website needs to display the country of origin. Now earlier, products that had the same product-id will get split into multiple product-ids. What are the side effects? 
Removing attributes can have the same consequence as editing the value of a product (covered in the section above).

It is important to capture these changes either separately or as part of the audit details of a given entity. It allows explainability and ensures that the consumer service of the information is aware of all the mutations that the entity underwent, when it happened and any other side effects associated with the change. This equips the consumer service to handle their use-case in an informed manner. 
Entity deprecation
 Deprecating an entity and managing its side effects is a non-trivial subject (to say the least). Some side effects have to be managed as part of the transaction deprecating the entity. Other side effects can happen asynchronously. Consider the following scenario - 
A product is not selling very well on the site and the management decided to discontinue the sales of the product. 
In the catalog, what should happen to the corresponding entity? Do we mark it archived immediately? Don't think so. But why not?
There is already inventory sitting in our warehouses. There is material already in transit from the manufacturer. Products that have been delivered can be returned. The returned products need to be inventoried and sold again. 
But, we want to stop any new orders from getting placed by the procurement. 
Maybe, we want to stop selling the product in one city but want to keep selling it in others. How do we handle that?
When is a product really out of the system and can be safely archived?

There are all these questions and many others that need to be answered through policies before we decide to mark a product archived. 
Another big lacuna is, what if at some point in future, the management wants to sell the product again. Will you remove the product from depreciation or create a new one? If you create a new one, how will you connect the old and new to ensure proper reporting?
Change authorisation
Any mutation of the system should carry the following details
Source of change request
Who requested the change (human|system|policy)?
Is authorisation needed? If yes, what is the process, and who will authorise?
Who executed the change?
When was the change executed?
Have all the side effects of the change played out?
Is the system in a consistent state post the change?


Remember a mutation of a system involves any and every mutation activity like entity creation, attribute updates, model updates etc.
Every change needs to have a rollback strategy. This rollback can be caused due to some downstream service failing to accommodate the change as part of the distributed transaction executing the change. 
The above set of details also generates a form of an activity log and brings explainability for any person or system to refer to in the future. 


There are a lot of open questions and open statements that we need to answer. In the 2nd part of this article, I will follow up with possible choices and a solution wherein I will try to accommodate all the design features that we have identified above. 
With the 1st part, I was hoping to establish the idea that there is a special class of design problems that relate very closely to managing any kind of master data. I would love to hear any opinions, thoughts, and especially any critiques to this idea.