---
layout: post
title:  "The 5th Dimension!"
date:   2024-08-11 14:34:25
categories: philosophy
tags: featured
image: /assets/article_images/2024-08-11-5th-dimension.webp
---
# The 5th Dimension
---
I’m not a religious person and I often find it amusing how someone can put blind faith into another human (God-man) just because of how this God-man performed a miracle. More of then than not, especially in case of Rishis and sages they would perform the miracle of bringing up really peculiar incidents from one’s past. This creates a disbelief in the recipients minds and somewhere they are then ready to surrender their intelligence, ego to this God-man. And it not that only less educated individuals or families  will fall into this so called trap it would be some of the most well educated and well achieving individuals. I think somewhere no matter where one has reached in life or achieved there is always that empty shell and hence everybody is seeking some non obvious answer. And when they see a miracle being performed they gravitate towards the God-man who may hold the key for them. 

I personally always thought it to be total BS. But recently it occurred to me that there is a change that there might be something there. We know that we humans live in a 4 dimensional world (3D space and time). In this 4D world we can move freely up down, right left, ie we can freely move in the 3D space. But the 4th dimension of time is inaccessible. Now imagine if we were a 5 dimensional being we will be able to move back and forth in the Time dimension too.  One way to imagine these events is like snapshots of your life arranged one after another. A 5 dimensional being can move back and forth across this deck of snapshots.  The best visualisation of this is something that was shown the end scene of the movie Interstellar.  

BTW, what is Time? In modern physics there is no real concept of time (at least that is what I understood). If there was no heat, one cannot define Time. Let me explain with an example. If there is a pendulum which is not loosing its energy in the form of heat, it will be impossible for an observer to tell when it started and when it will end. Every oscillation is exactly the same as the last one. The same event is happening again and again in a loop. Instead, if there is loss of energy due to heat the observer can accurately pinpoint the beginning and the end as every oscillation will be different from the previous ones. That is Time. In the quantum realm there is no real concept of time. Once you are beyond the event horizon, one can technically go back and forth in time.

One of the concepts that is talked about in Hinduism is the concept of Maya. Mays is like a world that has been stitched in front of our senses. We interact with it on a daily basis using our senses and that is where we lead over life. It is like our real self has been trapped. As per Hinduism, the real purpose of life is to lift this veil and seek the truth that lives beyond Maya. Now why the Truth is hiding from us is not very clear to me. However, I understand the abstract concept. The lure of Maya is so much that most of us, like 99.9999999% of us, are unable to unhinge ourselves from it and look beyond. But, what if some of us can. We often hear that Rishis go into Dhyaan for days together. It appears as if in their mind they have gone beyond the here and now. What if, these sages are able to enter the 5th dimension in which they can easily travel back and forth the 4th dimension of Time. 

This idea is fascinating to me. I don’t believe in the idea of miracles or God-men. But somehow with my limited understanding of these concepts and very limited knowledge  of modern day Physics this seems like a real possibility. I believe that we were not a society only driven by fear. The sub-continent unlike today was a prosperous land and land of excess. When one lives in such a society one’s mind is free of all the daily troubles that keeps one tied to reality’s cycle of happiness and sorrow. It is then implied, that there is quite a possibility that our ancients were able to access the world beyond the 4 dimensions. The way they describe the concept of Maya and how they are able to accurately depict someone’s past and that the absolution lies when one is able to break through the force of Maya now sits well into my mind’s mould. I think there is value in understanding these concepts more. Even though every time if I have tried reading about it, there are only inferences that are scattered in all the books and no background or explanation other than some abstract ideas. You would often hear the God-mean say that it is all about believing as this is something that is beyond what our senses can reason, observe or measure and hence unreasonable. I find this statement repulsive as for one, it doesn’t challenge me, it only asks me to submit. It doesn’t allow for doubt and intrigue. And second, I have seen too many bad actors taking advantage of  innocent people. 

Nevertheless, this is where I am. I think there is value in exploring this idea more.